Design correction — Yes/No variable type (flagged by power user):
The Yes/No variable type in Section 4.3 needs to be corrected. Yes/No implies a simple true/false abstraction but HA booleans only apply to actual HA boolean helpers. Devices report their own native states — on/off, open/closed, detected/clear, active/inactive — not yes/no.
Decision: Keep Yes/No as a variable type for actual HA boolean helpers only. For device states, the capability-driven wizard fetches and displays the real native values from HA — whatever HA reports for that specific device. No translation layer, no abstraction. The wizard already does this correctly by design. The variable type table in Section 4.3 should be updated to clarify this distinction, and any UI text that implies Yes/No covers device on/off states should be corrected.
When updating DESIGN.md for this, also check Section 6.4 conditions and Section 9 operators to make sure no operator language assumes yes/no as a device state.
Design correction — Global variables storage (Section 4.1 and Section 19):
Remove all references to "push to HA live memory" and input helpers. Remove the startup sync script entirely.
Correct design: When globals are saved in PistonCore, the companion writes <ha_config>/pistoncore/globals.json. Compiled PyScript files read this file directly at runtime using standard Python file reading — confirmed viable by PyScript documentation. No Docker dependency, no input helpers, no size limits, no UI exposure. If globals.json is missing when a piston runs, the piston logs a plain English error and stops gracefully.
Also add to Section 17.3: PyScript requires allow_code_remote: true in configuration.yaml for the pyscript.reload service to work. Companion setup must instruct the user to add this line or complex piston deployment will fail.
Section 16 / Section 17.3 — YAML subfolder requires configuration.yaml entry:
The companion setup must add automation: !include_dir_merge_list automations/ to configuration.yaml once during initial setup. This allows HA to pick up YAML files from automations/pistoncore/ automatically. This is the only configuration.yaml modification PistonCore makes. Document this explicitly in Section 17.3 companion setup instructions. After this one-time addition, deploying new YAML pistons requires only writing the file and calling automation/reload — no further configuration.yaml changes ever needed.
Section 17.3 — companion setup — be explicit:
The one configuration.yaml addition required is:
automation: !include_dir_merge_list automations/
This is the same change Jeremy already makes manually on his own HA. Document this exact line in the companion setup instructions so it is not left ambiguous for the developer.
New design requirement — companion setup transparency (add to Section 17.3):
During companion setup, before making any changes to Home Assistant, PistonCore must display a plain English summary of exactly what it is about to do and require the user to explicitly confirm before proceeding.
The confirmation screen must list every change individually. Example:
"PistonCore needs to make the following changes to your Home Assistant installation. Please review and confirm:

Add automation: !include_dir_merge_list automations/ to your configuration.yaml — this allows HA to load automations from subfolders, including the pistoncore subfolder.
Add pyscript: allow_code_remote: true to your configuration.yaml — this allows PistonCore to reload PyScript files after deployment without restarting HA.
Create folder <ha_config>/automations/pistoncore/ — compiled YAML automations will be written here.
Create folder <ha_config>/pyscript/pistoncore/ — compiled PyScript automations will be written here.
Create file <ha_config>/pistoncore/globals.json — global variables will be stored here.

No other changes will be made. PistonCore will never modify any file it did not create."
User must click I Agree — Make These Changes to proceed, or Cancel to abort with nothing changed.
If setup is cancelled nothing is written. If setup fails partway through, PistonCore reports exactly which step failed and what was and was not written.
Next session agenda item — companion design review:
The companion (HA custom integration) has been defined piecemeal through Docker design decisions. Before companion code is written, run a dedicated review of Section 17.3 to make sure it is complete and internally consistent. Key areas that emerged late and need consolidation:

Exact configuration.yaml additions and the user confirmation screen
globals.json written to <ha_config>/pistoncore/ — no Docker dependency at runtime
pyscript.reload service call after PyScript deployment
automation/reload API call after YAML deployment
Filesystem write access to automations/pistoncore/ and pyscript/pistoncore/
Full device capability profile fetching — not just entity lists
Trace data via custom WebSocket event
Validation pipeline execution (check_config and py_compile)

The Docker editor is designed first. Companion design review happens before companion coding begins.
Design correction — Phase 1 data fetching uses WebSocket API not REST (Sections 5, 17.2, 17.3):
The design currently says Phase 1 uses the HA REST API to pull device and capability data. This is incorrect. The WebSocket API must be used instead for the following reasons:
The WebSocket API has specific commands the REST API does not have that PistonCore requires:

get_triggers_for_target — all valid triggers for a specific device
get_conditions_for_target — all valid conditions for a specific device
get_services_for_target — all valid services for a specific device
config/entity_registry/list_for_display — optimized entity list for UI display

These are the exact commands the capability-driven wizard depends on. Without them PistonCore cannot populate the wizard dropdowns correctly from live HA data.
Correct design: PistonCore opens a WebSocket connection to HA using the long-lived access token on first launch and keeps it open during the session. All device, entity, capability, trigger, condition, and service data is fetched via WebSocket. The REST API is used only for simple one-off calls that don't require a persistent connection such as automation/reload.
Update all references to "HA REST API" in Phase 1 setup (Section 17.2) to "HA WebSocket API." Update Section 5 device model accordingly. The long-lived access token works for both — no change to setup flow required.
Note 1 — Dry Run for PyScript (Item 3):
The dry run / test feature for PyScript pistons is technically risky. Intercepting HA service calls inside a running PyScript file without actually executing them has no clean native mechanism.
Decision: Do not attempt a PyScript dry run that intercepts service calls. Instead:

For YAML pistons: dry run is fully supported — show what would be called without calling it
For PyScript pistons: dry run executes the logic but skips all service calls by wrapping them in a dry-run flag that the compiled template checks. If this proves too complex or unreliable during implementation, fall back to: PyScript test mode fires the piston live with a clear warning "This will execute real actions on your devices." No silent fake dry run.
Document this difference clearly in the UI — YAML test shows a preview, PyScript test is a live fire with warning.
Add to next session agenda: developer to assess whether dry-run flag approach is viable before committing to it.


Note 2 — Compiler Template System (Item 4):
The design mentions compiler templates as external and user-replaceable but never defines what they actually are or how they work. This needs a dedicated design discussion before coding starts.
Prompt for next session: Before writing the compiler, ask Claude to walk through exactly how the template system works — what format the templates are in, where they live on the Docker volume, how the compiler fills them in from piston JSON, and what "user replaceable" means in practice. Do not write compiler code until this is defined.

Note 3 — Call Another Piston (Item 5):
The "call another piston" statement type has a hidden technical problem. For PyScript pistons calling other PyScript pistons this is manageable. For YAML pistons there is no native way to trigger another automation and wait for it to finish — HA can fire an event that triggers another automation but cannot wait for its completion.
Decision:

PyScript → PyScript: supported, implement cleanly
YAML → YAML: supported as fire-and-forget only — triggers the other piston but does not wait for it to complete. User is warned of this limitation in the wizard when they add this statement to a simple piston
YAML → PyScript or mixed: if a user's piston needs to call another piston and wait, this forces conversion to PyScript. The conversion prompt applies here
Add a clear note in the wizard: "Calling another piston from a Simple piston will trigger it but will not wait for it to finish. Switch to Advanced mode if you need to wait for the called piston to complete."


Note 4 — Piston Run Status Reporting (Item 6):
The design says the companion reports piston run status back to PistonCore but never defines how. Compiled pistons run independently inside HA — PistonCore has no direct visibility into their execution.
Decision: Keep it simple and avoid risky custom mechanisms. Use what HA already provides:

Each compiled piston (both YAML and PyScript) fires a standard HA event at completion — success or failure — using HA's built-in hass.bus.fire in PyScript or event: in YAML
The companion listens for these events via its own WebSocket subscription to HA
When it receives a PistonCore event, it relays the run status to the PistonCore Docker via the existing WebSocket connection
The run log in PistonCore updates from this data
This uses only standard HA event mechanisms — no custom hacks, no fragile workarounds
Add to next session agenda: confirm that YAML automations can fire a custom event on completion and what that syntax looks like, and confirm PyScript hass.bus.fire works as expected in compiled files


Note 5 — YAML vs PyScript feature parity and user warnings (captures your decisions):
Decision — feature parity approach:

Where YAML cannot support a feature cleanly, do not fake it with a workaround
At first launch PistonCore displays a plain English explanation of the difference between Simple pistons (YAML) and Complex pistons (PyScript) and what features are only available in Complex mode
When a user builds a piston and tries to use a feature that requires PyScript but their piston would compile to YAML, PistonCore prompts: "This feature requires converting your piston to a Complex piston (PyScript). Would you like to convert? Your logic will be preserved."
If YAML loses too much function during implementation testing, evaluate pushing to PyScript-only compilation. Add this as a decision point during sandbox testing — not a decision made now
The experimental warning at first launch covers this — users are informed things may not work perfectly until thoroughly tested

perminent note for any ai reading this: What technical assumptions in this design are most likely to be wrong
